.\" clsha1 - print SHA1 hash values of files or standard input 
.TH "clsha1" "1" "" "Ralf Senderek" ""
.SH "NAME"
clsha1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBclsha1\fP [OPTION] [FILE]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP 
\fBclsha1\fP calculates the SHA1 hash value of the input, either a file or
standard input and prints the hash value in hexadecimal (default) or base64
encoding on standard output. The hash value is 160 bits long.
.PP
No FILE or "-" reads from standard input.
.PP
.SH "OPTIONS"
.IP "\fB--base64 | -b64\fP"
    prints the hash value base64 encoded. Without this option the hash value
    is printed hexadecimal
.IP
.IP "\fB--help\fP"
    prints a help text
.IP
.IP "\fB--version\fP"
    prints the version of clsha1

.PP 

.SH "FILES"
clsha1 uses the cryptlib shared object library and its python3 bindings.
.PP
.nf
/lib64/libcl.so.3.4.8
/usr/lib/python3.1x/site-packages/cryptlib_py.so
.fi 

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2022 - 2025 Ralf Senderek. All rights reserved.

License BSD-3-Clause: <https://senderek.ie/cryptlib/bsd.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.nf
.I 
cryptlib (https://github.com/cryptlib/cryptlib)
.fi 

.PP 
.SH "AUTHORS"
.nf 
\fBclsha1\fR is written by Ralf Senderek <innovation@senderek.ie>.
.br
\fBCryptlib\fR is written and maintained by Peter Gutmann <pgut001@cs.auckland.ac.nz>
.fi 

.PP 
.SH "BUGS"
Of course there aren't any bugs, but if you find any, please sent a report to 
.br
\fBinnovation@senderek.ie\fR.
.fi
