.TH CLSMIME "1"          "June 2025" "Cryptlib Tools"  "Cryptlib Tools"             CLSMIME "1"
.SH NAME
\fBclsmime\fR \- S/MIME public key encryption tool interoperating with Thunderbird, Evolution, Outlook and OpenSSL
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B clsmime [OPTIONS] encrypt messagefile certificate

.B clsmime [OPTIONS] decrypt encrypted_message KeysetName

.B clsmime [OPTIONS] sign messagefile KeysetName

.B clsmime [OPTIONS] verify signed_message [CArootCertificate]

.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBclsmime\fR encrypts text or binary data with a RSA \fBpublic key\fR stored in a recipients's certificate file.
.PP
\fBclsmime\fR decrypts or signs S/MIME data with a RSA \fBprivate key\fR stored in a *.p15 keyset file.
RSA public and private keys stored in *.p15 keyset file can be generated and managed with \fBclkeys\fR.
.PP
\fBclsmime\fR verifies S/MIME signatures with enclosed certificates. The signer's certificate will be 
checked against an optional issuer CA certificate. This CA certificate will be considered as a trusted
CA root certificate.

The resulting encrypted and/or signed S/MIME message files can be exchanged with either OpenSSL or
Email clients that support the processing of S/MIME messages (like Thunderbird, Evolution or MS Outlook).

.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.TP
\fB\-help\fR
display this help and exit
.TP
\fB\-version\fR
output version information and exit
.TP
\fB\-debug\fR
print debugging information to stderr
.TP
\fB\-detach\fR     
generate a detached signature in S/MIME format as multipart/signed
.br
(default is a signature including the enclosed text message)
.TP
\fB\-binary\fR
do not change the input bytes (default is \fBtext mode\fR)

in \fBtext mode\fR all '\\n' are replaced by '\\r\\n' and a Content-Type header is added in front of the input bytes before the message is signed. When clsmime verifies a signed message, the Content-Type header and the additional '\\r' characters are removed after verification. Thus the verification bytes that are stored into the file system match the original text message.
.TP
\fB\-certchain\fR
write the certificate chain to the file system during verification of a S/MIME signature.
.PP

.SH INTEROPERABILITY
.PP
	
.PP
.TP

\fBS/MIME capable E-mail clients\fR (Thunderbird, Evolution, Outlook)

\fBThunderbird or Evolution:\fR Import the CA certificate (into the CA section) before you import a user's certificate
(into the person section).


\fBMicrosoft Outlook:\fR Use the contacts tab to enter the Common Name and the email address and finally 
click on the \\'certificate button\\' to import the contact's certificate stored in a *.cer file.

.TP
\fBOpenSSL\fR

The following OpenSSL commands can be used to exchange message files with \fBclsmime\fR :\br

\fB Encryption   :\fR openssl smime -encrypt -aes-256-cbc -in message -binary -out message.smime certfile

\fB Decryption   :\fR openssl smime -decrypt -in message  -out message.clear -recip cert -inkey RSAkey

\fB Signing      :\fR openssl smime -sign -in message -text -signer cert -inkey RSAkey -out message.sig

\fB Verification :\fR openssl smime -verify -in message -out message.verified -inkey certfile -CAfile CAcert

\fBCertChains\fR can be examined with: 
.br
sed -i \'s/CERTIFICATE CHAIN/PKCS7/\' certchain ; openssl pkcs7 -in certchain -text -print_certs
.PP

.SH NOTES
Full documentation <https://senderek.ie/cryptlib/tools>     

This program depends on two packages providing the cryptlib shared object
library and the python3-bindings to this library.

You can download both packages in RPM or DEB format at 
https://senderek.ie/cryptlib/downloads

Using FEDORA, you can install the packages cryptlib and cryptlib-python3
directly from the repository.

In addition the program /bin/systemd-ask-password is needed to read sensible
data from stdin. This program is part of the systemd package.

.SH "FILES"
.PP
.TP
/usr/bin/systemd-ask-password
This program is used to provide the passphrase based on a user's input.
.TP
/lib64/libcl.so.3.4.8
The cryptlib library.
.TP
/usr/lib/python3.1x/site-packages/cryptlib_py.so
Bindings to the cryptlib library used by python3.
.PP

.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to innovation@senderek.ie

.SH AUTHORS
.nf
\fBclsmime\fR is written by Ralf Senderek <innovation@senderek.ie>.
.br
\fBCryptlib\fR is written and maintained by Peter Gutmann <pgut001@cs.auckland.ac.nz>
.fi

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024 - 2025 Ralf Senderek. All rights reserved.

License BSD-3-Clause: <https://senderek.ie/cryptlib/bsd.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
cryptlib, clkeys, claes, clrsa
